All right.
So in this lesson we're gonna be covering some advanced data visualization techniques.
And I want to show you how to create 3-D charts in Python.
So let's start off with a section heading.
Change this to markdown.
And I'm going to use the pound symbol and then right example for data of is with 3D charts and in the
same markdown cell.
We're only playing with a little bit more of the latest notation.
Let me show you the function that we're going to minimize.
This function will have two variables.
So it's both going to have an X and Y and we'll have to minimize our cost across both of these inputs.
So both of these parameters will have to be optimized in order to minimize the cost.
So here's what our cost function will look like.
So I'm going to add a subheading and I'll say minimize to Dollar Signs F of X comma Y is equal to and
then I'm going to use the backslash to put in a keyword here F R A C Frank frac for fraction and then
I'm going to use a curly brace of one close the curly brace and then have another opening clip race
and then put it two and another close in curly brace and then when I put two dollar signs at the end
for my closing tag and Hillary press shift and to show you what this late notation actually looks like.
So what you see here is that we've created a fraction by using this tag right here the top part of the
fraction is between the first set of curly braces and the bottom part of the fraction is in the second
pair of curly braces.
The function that we're actually gonna be minimizing isn't one 1/2 it is three to the power of.
And then it'll be another opening curly brace minus X to the power of two minus Y to the power of two
closing curly brace and then I'll add one at the end.
Now let me shift enter to show you what this function looks like.
Voila.
Now a nice little trick with complicated functions like this is that we can split it up a little bit.
This also makes it easier to write it in the python code so we can also write it like this can say minimize
to Dollar Signs f of x y is equal to and then have again the backslash fraction curly brace one and
then another curly brace R plus one closing curly brace to DOLLAR SIGNS AND THEN WHERE ALL THE SIGN
ARE CLOSING dollar sign is and then another dollar sign three to the power of opening curly brace minus
X to the power of two miners y to the power of two closing curly brace and then another dollar sign.
And what this line of markdown will nicely do is show us again the difference between using two dollar
signs in the latex markdown or one dollar sign in a late take markdown.
So if that double dollar sign we get that equation centered and with a single dollar sign we get that
notation in line.
Now let's write the python code to express this function.
So I'm going to go with the second way of expressing this equation because I think it makes it much
more clear and easy.
So Mercedes F F X comma Y colon R is equal to three times times open parentheses minus X times times
2 minus Y times times 2.
And then I'll say return 1 divided by parentheses R plus 1.
And I'll shift enter.
And this is what our function looks like in Python.
So even though we could have written all of this in one line here after the return keyword I find it
much more readable if we split it up like this.
Now let's create a chart with this function.
Let's see what this actually looks like on a graph has always with chants we've got to make some data
first so we're going to use that Lynn space function again but this time we're gonna create data for
both our x's and our y.
So I'm going to create a variable called X under school for it's equal to end p for num pi Lin space
parentheses start equals minus two stop equals two and then and u m equals two hundred and I'll do the
same for our y because we've got two variables now so we'll have Y underscore for equals and p dot Lin
space start equals minus two comma stop equals to come up and um equals two hundred.
So while we're at it let's take a look at what the type of x under school 4 actually is what type of
object is this.
We can see that Lin space gives us a num pi array and end the array and we can also see the same thing
if I move my cursor overland space hit shift tab and then I can see here if I press the plus sign
and I scroll down it returns a and the array Yeah the Lin space function returns an end the array so
I can see this both if I print out the type or if I take a look at the documentation.
Now the interesting thing with the arrays is that they have a shape they have rows and they have columns.
So what we can do is we can look at the shape of this array we can see shape of X array comma X underscore
for dot shape yeah so shape is an attribute of the end the array so let's put this out see what we get
so we can see that we've got a one dimensional array with two hundred rows.
Hey mathematician would refer to this type of data structure as a vector.
Let's keep that in mind for later and move on to trying to plot stuff but before we dive into plotting
things right away let's have a quick think about what a plot might consist of.
If we look at our previous Python code that say generated this plot right here what we see is that our
chart is in fact made up of different pieces that come together for the final product.
So for example we had our data points that were plotted as a scatter plot on the diagram and this was
separate from the line that was being charted.
Also our plot had other bits of information to write it had things like title and labels and so on.
The point I'm trying to make is that we've actually used several different types of Python objects to
make our final chance in this lesson we're gonna be generating a 3D plot that will look something like
this.
However to make this 3D plot we have to stop manipulating other types of Python components that make
up this diagram.
These Python components include the figure object and the axes object.
Now we've already met the figure.
Remember how we sized our plots previously.
We did that by manipulating the figures size.
So let's come down here add a little comment generating 3D plot and let's size our new plot with PDT
dot figure parentheses fig size equals and then we'll pass in a list with the square brackets sixteen
and twelve.
So this is how we sized our figure always.
Now here's something new that we can do with this code.
If a head shift tab on this function then I can see by expanding the documentation and scrolling down
that this function in fact returns something.
This figure function has an output and it returns well it returns a figure yeah a figure.
Instance will be returned.
And since this bit of code has an output we can actually store that output somewhere.
So I'm going to create an object call it fig and set it equal to the output from this bit of code here.
So now our figure object is stored in a variable called Fig.
At this point you might be asking what's a figure.
And the answer is it's a little bit abstract conceptually a figure is just a math plot lib object that
allows us to manipulate our final chart in certain ways like by say changing the size or adding axes
to the chart.
In fact you can think of a figure as a kind of top level container that contains other elements in the
chart.
That's just how the map plot lib library is structured in their code that we're using.
The figure is a container for other bits of the chart not a follow up question is what kind of other
elements are contained in a figure.
Well one element actually is the charts axes and we are particularly interested in the charts axes because
we're gonna have to manipulate them.
So the axes we're going to store in a variable as well.
So going to say a X is equal to Fig dot G C A print the C's projection equals then the string 3 D.
So what's happening here is that we're calling a function called GCA which is short for get current
axes.
So we're getting the axes from the figure and we're storing them in a variable as well.
So our fig object came in handy here on this line because we're using the fig object to grab our axes.
Now I can't actually run the code like this a press shift into I'm going to get an error
and the error reads value error unknown projection 3D.
The reason we're getting this error is because we have to import our 3D axes into our Python notebook
so we're screwed back up all the way where we had notebook inputs and packages.
And here I'm going to add the code from NPL under school tool kits don't and plot 3D Dot axes 3D import
capital a axes three and then capital D.
So it's quite a mouthful.
We're importing something very specific.
So from NPL underscore toolkits stunt and plot 3D Dot axes 3D import axes 3D.
And then going to have to hit shift into on this import that way we've refreshed our Python notebook.
And if I scroll all the way down to the bottom I can now go to the cell and actually run it.
It will recognise our 3D axes and will actually generate an empty chart for us like this.
Okay.
When I click back into the cell and add our next line of code because now that we've got our 3D axes
we can try plotting our function on them.
The method that we're going to call on our axes object.
So writing a X dot is called plot surface so we're not plotting a line were plotting a surface because
now we're in 3D space so we'll see a plot surface parentheses and then we have to feed our data to it.
So we're going to say X underscore for and then Y underscore for and then for our z axis a third dimension
it's gonna be f x underscore for comma Y underscore for and then two parentheses at the end.
So this is the function that we want to call to actually plot a 3D chart and we're doing this on the
3D axes object itself but before on this there's still something I have to do.
So let me quickly pull up the documentation here by pressing shift and then tab on my keyboard and hitting
the little plus sign here we can see in the signature that three required inputs and X Y and Z but scrolling
down we can also read that these three inputs need to be 2d arrays.
So they need to have two dimensions.
But let me ask you this is X underscore for and Y underscore for a 2D array as it is right now.
The answer is no.
If we look here our shape that we've printed out is in fact showing us that we have a one dimensional
array.
So it's got two rows but it's only got one dimension.
So there's something we have to do we have to make this two dimensional and we add some more lines on
the top here to meet our requirement for our plot surface function.
We have to transform our X underscore for and our y underscore for two a two dimensional array.
So I've got a one dimensional vector and it should become a two dimensional matrix.
And this is where our good friend num pi comes to the rescue.
Once again we've got a really really good name pi function called mesh grid that we're gonna make use
of to do just that.
So I'm going to type x underscore for comma Y underscore for is equal to.
You'll notice I'm using sequence unpacking here.
So X and is go for comma Y let's go for is equal to.
Dot mesh grid parentheses x underscore for Y on the school for.
So what does mesh grid do.
If I look at the docs I can see that this method returns a coordinate matrix from a coordinate vector
so it will return to us a two dimensional array given a one dimensional array let's print out the shape
so I can prove this to you I'll see array after the mesh grid comma X underscore for dot shape it's
run this again and here we see that our array now is two hundred rows by two hundred columns.
So I can show you what this would look like actually but I'm not going to show you a 200 by 200 matrix
I'll just show you a five by five.
So want to change the arguments here to our Lynn space function and then downhill say X underscore for
and we can actually see what it looks like if it was a five by five matrix.
So this still is two dimensional in contrast to what it was before we called the mesh grid function.
This print statement is showing us that here at this point it was still one dimensional but by the time
we've run mesh grid it has become two dimensional.
All right.
So delete this really quick here and I'll change our arguments back to two hundred and I'll read one
the cell.
Now it's time to look at our 3D chart.
So let me add peel teed off show parentheses and head shift and scrolling down we see our beautiful
surface being plotted on a 3D axis just like this.
Very nice.
So I'm very proud of our creation here.
But the I think it could use some improvements.
For starters I can't really tell which axes is which.
Just by looking at this.
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna add some labels to our axes.
Now here's the thing.
Previously we've added peel t dot X label.
Yeah and had a function call like this but we've got a 3D chart and so we're going to call our method
on our axes object.
So we gonna see a X dot set underscore X label and then we'll pass in the string X with a font size
equal to 20 and I'm gonna copy this code paste it two more times but instead of the X label I'll have
the Y label and the Z label as well.
And of course I'm wouldn't change the string to display to Y and then I'll change the z axes to f parentheses
x y hyphen cost so that we will have a label on all our three axes of our 3D chart.
Let me hit shift enter and update what's on screen voila.
So this is what the Z label looks like.
We've put our X label and our y label brilliant.
So that's starting to look pretty decent.
But you know what we can make it look even better.
And the way we're gonna do this is by using color adding color provides so much additional information
when it comes to data visualization.
So my objective looking at this is to be able to visually differentiate not just based on where things
are.
If a value is high or low but what color a certain area is on this chart I want the color itself to
tell me if the cost is high or low.
And to do that we're gonna have to import a module called the color map somewhere scroll back up and
in our very first cell and keep all the import statements nice and tidy up top.
I'm going to see from map plot lib import CRM and see m stands for color map I'm going to shift enter
and the scroll back down
and then I'm going to modify this call to are plot surface function.
This plot surface function can take some additional arguments and one of these arguments is surprise
surprise.
A color map.
So I'm going to say see map.
Is equal to.
And then when I use the color map module that we've just imported.
So want to say see map is equal to see em Dot.
Cool warm cool warm is one of the color maps that we can use from the color map module.
So let me update this chart right now beheading shift into.
There we go.
Isn't that amazing.
I think this is so so cool but just like with our regular line plots and our surface plots we can actually
add transparency to this plot as well so we can go back to our plot surface call and add a comma at
the end and then provide an additional argument namely alpha equals and then say zero point four to
add some transparency.
So let me add shift into an update the chant now it looks like this with the above a value add zero
point four.
We can even see our grid shining through on the back of our chart.
Now personally I think this chart is done to look quite wonderful because we've got our high cost in
red and we've got our low cost in dark blue hues.
So we can already visually differentiate between costs that are high and low.
Just by looking at the color and also based on similar colors we can see which parts of our chart actually
have a similar cost as well.
I'm going to end this lecture on a challenge.
Can you change the color mapping of this chart I mentioned earlier that there's quite a few different
color maps available and we've used one of them called Cool warm.
Can you dig into the documentation and change the color map on this chart to something else.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video before I show you how
and here's the solution.
Part of becoming a proficient programmer.
His getting really good at googling and I'll show you two pages that you can use to give you some inspiration.
So there's this one here where it's all about choosing color maps.
And here you can find the names and the look of various different types of color maps.
So for example one of the color maps is called plasma.
So if I update my code here to see m dot plasma then I'll get a color map that looks like this on my
chart.
But of course you're not limited to this.
You can also strongly on a no winter or hot see what those look like S.M. dot winter will give us this
look and see them dot hot we'll give us this look right here.
Now if Google didn't bring you to this page then perhaps you landed on this page instead the color maps
on the school reference dot P. why documentation.
And here you'll also see very very similar information you'll get a visual representation of various
different color maps that are available.
So either of these two pages from map plot lib dot org will give you the information that you need to
find the right color map to suit your preferences.